A second day of
talks in Doha
over a potential Gaza cease
fire and hostage release deal
have now ended.
CNN is told that technical teams
will continue to meet in the coming days,
until the main principals
meet again in Cairo next week.
This comes as the Israeli
military orders evacuations
from parts
of the so-called humanitarian zone
in southern Gaza.
Israel says that it has intelligence
that terrorist activity
is taking place there.
Since October of last year,
more than 80% of the Gaza Strip
has been subjected to evacuation orders.
That's according
to the UN's humanitarian agency.
Meanwhile,
a Palestinian village
in the occupied West
Bank has come under attack
by armed Israeli settlers.
Nic Robertson is tracking this story
for us
with a car behind was set on
fire as the settlers came
into this hilltop village.
The man who owns the car,
I talking to him.
His face is smashed up.
He said he tried to confront the settlers
as they came in.
He described a scenario
that they haven't
witnessed in this particular village
for a long time.
And he said, never before
in fights that they ever seen.
settlers coming
in, firing live rounds, firing tear gas.
And when we arrived in the town here
a little earlier on in the day,
we were witness to the funeral
cortege of Rashid,
said a 23 year old young man
who was shot dead by the settlers.
There was a lot of anger,
in that cortege
at the settlers,
at the Israeli government,
a lot of pain being felt.
This was a young man of the village.
He was being carried at shoulder
height, wrapped in a Palestinian flag.
young men carrying him, older men
watching from the sides.
And at the
at the funeral service in the graveyard
a little after the oration,
there was absolutely powerful,
and very clear in its message
that the people of this village
don't feel safe,
that they believe
that the settlers
were acting with the support
of the Israeli government.
They don't feel in this village
protected by,
the IDF, the Israeli Defense Force.
In fact,
they allege
that the Israeli Defense Force was
was protecting the settlers now.
the IDF did
stop a second attack
overnight getting into this village.
The IDF and the Israeli police
are investigating the incident.
So far, we've heard condemnation
coming from the US ambassador, Jack Lew,
saying it's
absolutely appalled by this
and these attacks must stop.
The defense minister of Israel,
Yoav Gallant, has put his condemnation
out as well, calling it radical violence.
That does not,
he said, does not stand up to the values
of the State of Israel.
Israel's interior
minister has condemned
it as well,
calling it, violent nationalist riots.
Those were his words.
So the condemnation
coming from Israeli
officials, even from right
wing leaders like Itamar Ben-Gvir,
although he did say that
the Israeli Defense Force should do more
to protect the settlers
and Israelis from the stone throwers
whom he calls terrorists
in his in these villages.
That's his allegation.
and he but he did say that this is
this is absolutely unacceptable.
So this is strong condemnation
coming from Israeli officials,
but it just doesn't cut through
in these villages.
People here don't feel safe.
and, and
and I think irrespective
of what they hear
from the Israeli government,
they will continue to believe
that events like last night,
the settlers coming in
unarmed in the village
when no one was expecting,
killing a young man, injuring others.
They think these are coordinated
by the government.
They're in cahoots together.
This is deeply divisive,
particularly at the time of these
very sensitive
talks in Doha about the future of Gaza
going on.
Nic Robertson, CNN, Jeet
and the occupied West Bank.
All right.
Joining us now
from Washington, DC is our chief
national security correspondent,
Alex Marquardt. Alex, good to see you.
Let's circle back to the cease fire.
Talk to me.
What what more do we know
about how these talks ended?
And also what progress was made, if any.
Well, they they ended on a positive note.
And the fact that we know
that more meetings
are going to be happening
in the coming days.
That that is positive.
But by no means are we on the cusp
of any kind of imminent deal renewal
that is important.
These main mediators.
So the heads of intelligence
for the Egypt, for Egypt
and the US, as well as the Katari
prime minister,
they went into these talks
with the Israelis, with Hamas,
trying to bridge some,
some pretty significant gaps.
And what we heard today
from those three mediating countries
in a joint statement,
was that they made progress
by putting forward
what they're calling a bridging proposal,
essentially a document
that takes all of the outstanding issues
and tries
to bring the two sides
closer together in terms
of how those issues
will not only be solved,
but how they will be implemented.
So what we're told
is that in the coming days,
now that these main talks
are over in Doha
at a lower level,
experts on what are called
technical teams will get together
to essentially cross
the T's, dot
the I's and really work
towards a final agreement.
And then towards the end of next week,
the main players again
will get back together
in the Egyptian capital, Cairo.
So we're talking about the CIA director,
Bill Burns,
the Egyptian intelligence director,
Abbas Kamel, the Qatari prime minister,
the Israeli head of the Mossad
intelligence agency, and Hamas.
And so these are encouraging signs.
But no one that I've spoken to,
Hal, is ready to say that
this is certainly something
that is going to happen.
I want to read you
part of the joint statement
that was released
just a short time ago
from the three mediating countries,
that says
it is time to release the hostages
and detainees,
begin the cease fire, and implement
this agreement.
The path is now set for that outcome.
Saving lives, bringing relief
to the people of Gaza and de-escalate
the escalating regional tensions.
One more note, Rachel.
This comes
as the prospect of a major strike
or major strikes
from Hezbollah
and Iran could happen against Israel.
Retaliatory strikes.
And so what the cease fire talks
those involved are hoping to
accomplish is essentially to push those
those potential strikes away to
to keep them at bay.
And in fact,
the Qatari prime minister has reached out
to the Iranian foreign minister
not once, but twice in the past two days
to keep him abreast of the talks
and to say that essentially
that they need to give these
these cease fire
discussions a chance
and that any kind of escalatory,
any kind of escalatory action,
a major strike could derail the prospect
for peace in Gaza.
Rachel and Alex,
I mean, to that end,
Israel is saying
and telling its counterparts
in the UK and France
that it expects their nations,
the UK and France, to attack
Iran if Iran strikes Israel.
Why?
I mean, where do those nations
stand on that?
But also, where is the U.S.
stand on this?
Well,
the US is essentially helping
coordinate that effort.
And let's remind our viewers
why we expect this to happen.
And several weeks ago,
there were a pair of strikes
that Israel is either publicly behind
or is believed to have been behind.
One was against a major figure
in the Hezbollah militant group
in Lebanon, Forward
Shakur, who was killed in an airstrike
in southern Beirut by Israel.
The next day,
there was an operation
that took out the top political leader
for Hamas in the Iranian capital.
Israel did not admit
that they carried that out,
but it is widely believed that they did.
And so now we're in a situation
where it is believed that Hezbollah
and or Iran could respond.
Now, it's been several weeks.
So we've been waiting to see
every single day
whether this is going to happen.
In the meantime,
the US has been assuring Israel
that it will come to its defense.
it is expected that the Brits
and the French
would also help in that defense.
And the major reasons
are not just because
they want to protect Israel.
But if there were major damage
and a lot of deaths in Israel
as a result of those strikes,
we could expect the situation
to really escalate
and potentially spiral out of control.
So the US, and potentially
with the Brits
and the French
are really trying to avoid that scenario.
but right now we are waiting and seeing
whether Hezbollah and Iran
could carry out those kinds of strikes.
Well, we continue to watch.
Alex Marquardt,
thank you for your reporting